so much thank you so much for being here
thank you so much for inviting me to do
this with you thank you for doing this
very excited to talk to you yeah we have
one after an ominous tone there anyway
okay and make sure you write good
questions on those cards we want them
real long and really wonky
okay now you we know each other a little
bit I just learned that we're basically
neighbors yeah and one of my neighbors
is in the audience here tonight hello
jack okay but we know each other a
little bit because you've been on my
show a number of times but not with you
not with me but most especially in a
piece on the subject of Arthur Laffer
who I know you must have just admires so
greatly he's one of the more likeable
you know sure Oh wrong about everything
but kind of like okay now this is your
28th book what is wrong with you what
are you what are you trying to
accomplish here you make us look bad
it's an interesting question because I I
had no idea by the way that it was 28
last track after it's not something you
do collections of stuff and then
occasionally something big - right and
and then text books that's you know are
they in in real life you know all these
books that actually try to change the
world for the better as one thing but
textbook sizzle is my wife and I
co-authors of the third best-selling
principles of economics textbook which
is known and housed as known in house as
you can always 401 K so there we are
anyway
and you're big in Spain you just told me
backstage that you're yeah I don't know
what they love they only ever touch my
books on the sides of buses that's about
that's glorious yeah okay we have
something else in common the President
does not like you I learned that
president is not like you and I don't
think you like him yeah thank you care
for him it's uh I have to say well all
right you know it it's so easy to make
fun of or or disdain or fear Trump and I
actually tried to not do too much of
that because other people are doing it
but the idea that amidst everything else
that's going on that he would take our
time to personally tweet against me sure
I mean that's it's it's a huge
compliment in a way in a way I'm
occupying a lot of obsessed with you you
occupy a lot of his brain space yes
rent-free is okay what happens in a day
I mean I can answer this question for
myself but he's tweeted about you all
quite a bit so you were on his mind what
is a day for you when that arrives in
your life I I've learned especially in
these days of Twitter but even before
that with with email and so on
you just have to develop a very off you
know let it roll off you if you know if
you're if you're writing and if you're a
public figure like thank yourself you're
getting the media in any form if you
aren't getting lots of hostile mail and
and people saying nasty things and
calling you names then you're probably
wasting your time
and so you don't you don't let it get to
you you just sort of okay there's
another one it's alright it doesn't
contain something that feels like an
actual threat then never never read the
responses to your tweets never read the
response you don't read that that's
right you're not read them and and let
it go I mean it's a I look at the
numbers because I want to be it I want
to be sure that people are interested if
you send something out and there's only
a handful of comments then you then
that's that's a bad sign that means
you've been to milquetoast but the but
otherwise it's it's not it really
doesn't I think I can say this honestly
that I really don't actually feel
anxiety or upset
at anybody Trump or anybody else saying
nasty things about me it sort of just
comes with the territory that's great it
does yes I agree that was like that was
a clap for me as well you can't you
can't really do your work if you're
distracted by that yes
okay so let's talk about arguing what
zombies I read it I loved it it's great
have you all do all have a copy okay
well no I'm saying um when you began
writing this book did you start out with
a certain theme in mind what did you
wish to accomplish with this book well
the the title actually it started
actually started with the title because
that was the because I feel like they so
this there's a lot of old columns and
they're mixed in with a bunch of new
material it really picks up from about
2004 you know after after the 2004
election and so on and one of the
constant themes that I have is is that
bad arguments just don't go away they
just keep on coming back and I actually
I stole the term zombie ideas from a
obscure paper about Canadian health care
of all things but it but it was so
perfect health care with you okay but
zombie you know the it's a perfect term
the zombie idea is is an idea that
should have been killed by evidence it's
just clearly wrong demonstrably wrong
but it just keeps on shambling along
people's brains and so this is us we're
a somatic tour of the zombie ideas that
that distort the way we talk about our
problems and and why do these zombie you
know what why are these zombies so
unkillable and that's kind of how it's
so it's structured by theme but it's it
that's the fundamental thing is it's
about understanding what it is we're
arguing about because that's we are we
do we do not have a lot of good faith
arguments in modern American politics
right there are things that you can
legitimately argue about there are
people with whom I can disagree but
respect but most of what goes on is not
there most of that is various kinds of
zombies and cockroaches was just a
little bit different and okay what does
a cockroach idea versus
zombi idea is an idea that shambles
along lurches forward eating people's
brains what's a cockroach cockroach idea
is one that you seem to be able to get
it rid of for a little while then it
comes a but it comes back yes you
kill it but it's 1,000 eggs if you think
you've gotten that's right and so yeah
so so the zombies and it's that's what
really you know so yeah you know tax
cuts pay for themselves that's a zombie
to ultimate zombie ideas that you think
are really front and center in our
current discourse okay so the to the the
ultimate zombie in American political
discourse is that that taxes on taxing
rich people does terrible things and cut
those taxes and wonderful things will
happen and everything yes so that's
that's the and and the tax cuts will pay
for themselves watch all that money
trickle down right watch and watch the
revenue gusher from the shore a booming
economy then probably the the other one
is that any attempt to protect the
environment will destroy jobs and and
you know make us they'll be grass
growing in the streets of all our cities
if we try to stop air pollution from
killing people so those are the probably
the two most important zombies but there
are others the myth that taxing the
wealthy will be destructive to the
economy why is that why is that
zombie impossible to kill why is that
impossible okay this is Upton Sinclair
it's difficult to get a man to
understand something when his salary
depends on is not understanding it the
there's a very very well financed
network of you know right-wing media
organizations think tanks and so on it
doesn't really take for billionaires it
doesn't take a large investment of their
money to keep afloat substantial number
of people prepare to defend the
indefensible endlessly when it's in
their interests so it's really it's all
about about basically hired guns
promoting ideas and
if the evidence says that they're wrong
never mind that's not what they're
they're not in the business of getting
things right mm-hmm
okay is the is the Trump tax cut in your
opinion the biggest scam in history I
mean did you expect them to lie so
boldly about this plan I thought it was
gonna be hard you know even okay so the
Republican my Republican Party has
developed an amazing talent each
successive Republican president manages
to make his predecessor look good
that's an incredible talent and so if
you go back to the bush tax I want to do
my show
thar gonna trade I'm gonna write 28
books and you're gonna host my shirt all
right but but if you go back to the bush
Europe they felt at least a little bit
of restraint they they didn't claim that
the tax cuts would pay for themselves
they claimed that we had a budget
surplus which was mostly an illusion but
anyway but that there was money to give
away and it was so they had excuses that
were not quite as blatant and they also
of course didn't have as long a record
of tax cuts having failed to deliver on
their promises for them for somebody to
come along in 2017 after the Bush years
after the failure of tax cuts in Kansas
after everything that happened and say
once again tax cuts they're gonna pay
for themselves that's a and for
essentially every Republican in Congress
to go along with that including supposed
moderates like Susan Collins that's
amazing that's a level of hutzpah that's
really kind of hard to credit even for
me
right yes I mean it's done so little for
ordinary Americans they basically
they've stopped talking about it yeah
they really don't talk about the terrace
caucus yeah yeah I mean you've huge I
mean basically cut corporate taxes in
half that's roughly what the way it's
worked out and we've gotten no corporate
investment is actually down it so none
of the money is going for any of the
alleged purposes it's just being used to
buy back stocks and
pay dividends and so that's that's a
prayer I mean I was a I thought it was
going to work badly but the it's worked
worse than even I imagined oh that's
very bad yeah that's a very that's very
unsuccessful okay well I wanted to talk
about the condition of the economy
because there are endless stories and
tweets about how the economy I mean just
from a single person about how the
economy how it's great it's doing and
how well the stock market is doing but
who precisely is the economy doing so
great for I think I have a guess okay
look let's be clear it low unemployment
is a good thing yes the fact that people
can find jobs it's a really good thing
and that's we weren't heading this wave
for quite a while but it is definitely
the case that unemployment has continued
you know which began declining in 2010
continued its decline under Trump and
that's a good thing
now wages have not done much of anything
so if we're waiting for some reversal
some end to the long long stagnation of
ordinary workers wages we ain't seen
that yet that's not happening the stocks
obviously are way up you know that's
moat the the vast majority of stocks are
held by a very small part of the
population so that's really nothing for
most people and it's it's not you know
better than not better to have some
growth but it is you know considering
the rhetoric during Obama's second term
the economy grew in an average rate of
2.4% sent in the two years since the tax
cut the economy has grown at an average
rate of 2.6% that doesn't look like the
sort of stunning triumphs that these
people are talking about so it's it's I
don't want to pretend they don't want to
say that that is it's don't want to make
this into a into a dystopian economy
it's not it's better to have full
employment than to have mass
unemployment but it's nothing great for
ordinary workers right there are always
okay we're in you know the middle of
already a very contentious election
season that started
in 2014 and will go to Eternity right it
will never ever end your god help us all
okay they're always so many there are a
million questions about the fiscal side
of a progressive agenda like how are we
gonna pay for this social safety net
obviously the most tenacious line of
questioning most often comes from people
who would never
interrogate the idea you know of a tax
cut for the wealthy and in your book you
wrote economic justice and economic
growth aren't incompatible in fact we
have had that before
can we have that again when can we have
that yeah so it's all about the politics
I mean we we we know that we can do it
look describe those times well okay no
so for a generation after World War two
we had growth that was very widely
distributed a much much more even
distribution I mean I grew up in that
era that was an era in which middle
managers and well-paid blue-collar
workers for basically comparable
salaries when there were really really
rich people didn't exist I mean there
must have been a few but they were not
prominent on the on the scene in which a
quarter of the of the workforce was
unionized and even though workers
weren't parts of unions were were
effectively protected by fear that the
the that unions would come in if they
were now mistreated we had you know top
top tax rate of 91% under that socialist
Dwight Eisenhower and the economy throw
thrived but I think it's also important
to realize that it's not just our own
history and if you want to say well but
that was a different world something
technology blah blah blah look at you
know look at European countries look at
Denmark which has first of all
two-thirds of the workforce is unionized
so unions in the market Denmark is a
socialist hellhole that's right heard it
was really funny they
there was a period once for some reason
FoxNews decided that Denmark was a
socialist hellhole yeah running stuff
and it just so happened that I was in
Denmark okay it's real hellhole of cute
seaside villages and no the point is and
everybody has health it has health care
wages are substantially higher for most
workers than they are here there's a lot
of support for families with children
and they do fine it's not a poor country
they have slightly lower GDP per capita
than we do which is entirely because
they take more vacations than we do
right they're there their output per
hour is exactly the same as ours but
they just take more vacations well I'm
from Canada originally and I'm always
intrigued by those arguments and was
intrigued when people and they do do it
often conflate social democracies and
socialism yeah
you know that's the that's the secret
you keep on seeing these polls that say
that young Americans favor socialism and
what's really happened is that after all
of these years of the right-wing saying
that anything you know if you if you
don't want poor kids to starve that's
socialism if you don't want if you don't
want rich people to if you want rich
people to pay sometimes as that
socialism at certain point people start
to say well in that case I'm a socialist
right exactly
I mean can't can we do a social safety
net is exactly as you say in the book
it's liberating
you I mean listen I live here now I'm a
citizen of the United States I love it
I'm in this fight like I love it here
you know I'm not going back but I will
say just culturally people don't walk
around with that 150 pound backpack that
they that's invisible that they don't
even know about
that's just like oh god I hope nothing
goes wrong with my health one day God
knows into the future what could it look
like that's right and and it's helped
right now they there is the it is in
fact the case that at least for now that
if you lose your job you can probably
get a subsidized the policy under
Obamacare and
and you can't be denied because of a
pre-existing condition
but that's something that we you know
it's a recent achievement that we got it
by the skin of our teeth and it's crazy
no other advanced countries like that in
Canada health care is guaranteed Canada
can is actually a little bit by the set
European standards Canada is kind of
stingy but it still has far far more aid
to family as far they just the you know
the basics of life are much more
reliably they're this constant fear that
if you take one wrong step and you
plunge into the abyss which is the norm
in America it just doesn't exist
anywhere else in the advanced world it's
just not something that you have to
think about on a day-to-day basis it
allows you in life I think to take a few
more risks to take an extra day off we
have there's a day off in Canada that's
just called family day and it's just
like hey man why don't you take the day
off and hang out with your kids like wow
it's inconceivable here everybody's
working so hard all the time that's
right it's it's and it seeps through
even to the elite
right and India which is the least of
our concerns but it so happens I think
this general fear or this anxiety level
what are the only its gonna be okay
well they're actually not because this
anxiety level translates into a general
rat-race feel to American society which
i think is our there are a lot of things
I'm very American I love this country
but there are that's one of the things
that is really something it's hard to
explain to people from other advanced
countries can see you're so rich why do
you live like this right mm-hmm
yes well what are many of the problems
here be more solvable if people just
paid their taxes
or if we had a robust system for
actually collecting the taxes that are
owed well we you know historically we've
been pretty good we usually the us used
to be especially good at getting
compliance with income taxes but there's
much more just plain tax cheating than
they used to because the IRS has been
starved of the resources straight-out
evasion
tax avoidance which is evasion but
except it just happens to be technically
legal is a big deal and particularly we
used to get a lot of money from
corporate taxes and now that you know
the corporations have found that they
just had their wreaths cut quite a lot
but even before that there was an awful
lot of legal but but legal but MRO
hanky-panky causing you know although
the profits earned in the United States
to somehow disappear and materialize in
the Bahamas or in Ireland and and that's
so we could just by actually closing the
loopholes and enforcing the laws we have
that's worth several hundred billion
dollars a year for a lot of stuff
they've effectively been gutted I mean
people they're you know I feel like it's
a story that's come up in my workplace
to do a story about how the poor you
know the poorest counties in Mississippi
are being audited at the same rate as oh
no we're more we're we're auditing
people getting Earned Income Tax Credit
which is to help the working poor are
much more likely to be audited then then
then business people then wealthy people
actually not necessarily people with
fake businesses that they used to
shelter their income and they could
disappear from the tax rolls right so
and that's a deliberate decision we've
actually deliberately encouraged
lawlessness on taxes let's talk about
your intellectual hero Paul Ryan
the amount of grief I got but very very
salty verbiage in the book concerning
Paul Ryan well yeah I mean uh it's it
was interesting cuz I back in 2010 first
time I wrote him about him I called him
a fluently flim-flam man he was he was a
phony and it was so obvious and but the
sort of Beltway media establishment has
decided that he was the model of a
serious conservative and he didn't want
to hear about it even though it was
right in front of your nose I think at
this point most people have figured it
out that he that he always was a phony
but it just tells you something I don't
know I mean it wasn't even I mean not
only was it flim-flam it wasn't even
good flim-flam it was so it was so
obviously the the the the the faking of
the numbers was clumsy I mean did I
offend this is my sense you know yes
you're gonna be a crooked this be a
smart crook yes he's got an incredible
PR team yes that's what I'm saying he
pushed through that terrible tax cut and
then as a final F you stuck his tail
between his legs and fled the party
rather than stand up to the president I
do not like why has he been held up to
such great heights because he really was
considered like the intellectual beating
heart of the party why was he held up to
those Heights people just want to
believe that there are still people left
in the GOP ever making sense there is
still not quite as much as there was but
there's still this convention that the
parties are symmetric that there that
the ideologies metric yes there are
dishonest conservatives but there must
be dishonest liberals that are
equivalent and if they're honest
liberals then there must be serious
honest conservatives so there was a slot
that had to be filled here is the
serious honest conservative and were
Paul Ryan his genius if you like was he
was able to play that part just well
enough to get slotted into that role
even though
took about five minutes of reading his
actual plans to realize that that he was
not in fact the character that he was
playing but the but that was it it was
very very clearly that people were
looking for there was there had to be
somebody like that right and in fact
there wasn't but Paul Ryan played to
that desire yes he was like central
casting yeah yeah so I mean I assume
that he's retreated and then he's gonna
write a book about like I tried to talk
to Trump just a book called I tried and
then he runs for a president I don't
know I I'm not sure that we'll hear from
him again but who knows what do I know
but the but it was the most amazing
thing because it was as plain it was the
clearest thing I've ever seen in the
u.s. politics was that this guy was a
phony and yet every I got a tremendous
amount of grief for for for saying that
for saying it's certainly for saying it
too soon what was the grief that you got
oh just you know lots of angry op-eds
denouncing me letters if I go to very
few elite dinner parties but when I did
people would say why are you so hard on
that nice guy Paul Ryan you're like well
I don't go to dinner parties anymore
that's right I cook you learned how to
cook yes I'm actually bad at that oh
good what's your favorite thing to make
I want to know
oh no and that's critical stuff okay
toaster oven broiled salmon is fantastic
I like it
when did recognizing reality become seen
as a liberal position anyway that's just
me
yeah
I mean but really no I think I think
that is a intentionally or not that is
kind of a quote from the book yes so I
and no well because you you have look
modern Republican Party is a is
something new Under the Sun in u.s.
politics I think maybe in world politics
it's a party that has been pulled off in
this direction by a combination of money
cynical political calculation and you
cannot be a good modern Republican
without denying reality and so if you're
if you're acknowledge reality it used to
be there was about values all right if
maybe it's depending on how much
redistribution you wanted to do from the
rich to the poor you could legitimately
say well I'm a conservative I don't
think we should do very much of that but
nowadays in order to be a Republican in
good standing you have to believe that
tax cuts pay for yours for themselves
you have to believe that climate change
is a hoax you have to believe a whole
lot of things that are sort of obviously
not true and so if you do say that
they're true then me just just right now
I I've been seeing you know screenshots
of Fox explaining that John Bolton is a
left-wing radical I'm a head exploded
okay you have said you said in the book
to be honest I wonder whether I'm
wasting my time talking about any issue
other than climate change there's a
strong economic dimension when
discussing the issue of climate change
what is your role as an economist in
contributing to that debate okay so I'm
not a climate scientist
I do read climate scientists and I think
I I do think my detector is
reasonably good I mean I know what I
know when actual I know what actual
science sounds like and so I can tell
though you know what it but the main
thing is that what I can do is talk
about how much does it cost to
drastically reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and there it's really clear
that it's not that hard that even ten
years ago it looked like it was
manageable and now
technology has been our friend I mean
there's been absolutely spectacular
progress in renewable energy in fact so
much so that really coal which is the
single worst thing coal is dying even
without a climate policy because it
can't compete with wind and solar and so
it takes only a little bit of additional
government policy to make a huge
difference in in the prospect for the
planet and it's an incredible tragedy
that we're not doing this because right
now everything everything except the
politics is lined up for us to be able
to solve this problem before it it
solves us but I'm afraid that it we may
not get there in your book you call it
the the in your book you say that
there's depravity in climate change
denial and I really appreciated that can
you elaborate on that sure if your take
imagine a person let's call him mr. Koch
[Laughter]
who has a lot of money some of which not
all of which is tied up in the value of
assets like coal mines that we should
not that should be abandoned because we
shouldn't be doing this you're and
you're not stupid you have to understand
at some level that that will possibly
dooming civilization by continuing to to
burn fossil fuels at the rate we're
burning them and you're willing to take
that risk with civilization for the sake
of avoiding some reduction in your vast
fortune that sounds pretty depraved to
me and that's that's really where we are
at this point in the debate great
you began your career studying
international trade what do you think of
Trump's thinking on trade wars and
tariffs okay so let me give you a maybe
what people don't expect which is that I
think it's it's stupid but I don't think
it's all that damaging international
trade is one of those things that people
love to dwell on because for a variety
of reasons but partly because it sounds
fancy and important you know global a
global Oney as people used to say or
actually I used to own long ago my
parents gave me a sweatshirt that they
applicate across a global schmoeville
and that's in LA and they say because
every time you're fine and off to
someplace they and we ask you what
you're talking about I say is global
schmoeville
so so it's it's an exaggerated subject
now Trump comes in with this his own
version of this exaggerated view of how
important it's not this trivial the
international trains a big thing but the
idea that it's it's the be-all and
end-all whether it's this immense force
for good or this immense force for evil
as Trump things it is it really isn't so
what Trump has done I think in in a way
the worst thing about his trade wars is
not the damage that's doing to the
global economy though it is doing some
clearly it's creating uncertainty it's
disrupting supply chains and all of
these and I can start to jargon my way
all the way across this hall but the but
the worst of it is that the United
States is making a mockery
it happens that international trade is
is one of the great triumphs of
international diplomacy we've created a
rules-based system not a rigid one where
countries can never do anything but one
in which there are procedures there are
essentially international course that
adjudicate disputes it's it creates a
degree of certainty and what Trump has
done is to basically rip all of that up
and make us effectively a lawless nation
on when it comes to international trade
which spills over onto other things
so he's made us we are no longer a
reliable partner we everybody now knows
that the United States will rip up its
agreements on the whim of some guy in
the White House and that's God I have
spillover effects to everything we are
just not a country people can trust
anymore and how do you see that bearing
out for the next year well you know it's
are you good at you're good at defining
things no it's okay
I mean a lot of what's happened I mean I
the trade Ward actually has done I'd say
more damage than I thought it would
because of the uncertainty and the it's
looking a little bit like Trump is
getting reaching where I thought he
might reach which is to declare victory
a surrender
so effectively that's what he did on
NAFTA
you know the created the new NAFTA which
is almost indistinguishable from the old
NAFTA just stuck his name on it and on
China although the tariffs are still in
place basically the reports say that the
Chinese are actually sort of can't
believe that they got away with so few
concessions and so that's a lot of
what's happened but then again you never
know what's coming there so there might
he may be about to slap tariffs on
German automobiles which are a threat to
national security which we know I can
understand that but that's a but but so
the it's not clear where there'll be
another round of damage but so far I
think we've probably seen most of the it
probably shaved a couple of a couple of
tenths of a percentage point off growth
in the past year okay are there battles
that you have taken on in which you feel
that you have made a difference Social
Security oh one can you talk about that
yeah boy I can't because the darkness I
can't see the how many I think that
friend are people who probably remember
that so we had this election in 2004 I
don't
yeah and and it was it was an election
it was an election that was largely
about terrorism and the illusion of
victory in Iraq and also about gay
marriage as I say in Bush was elected as
the nation's defender against gay
married terrorists and and then he
immediately turned around and said I now
have a mandate to privatize Social
Security and a lot of people thought he
was gonna get it because they've been
winning a lot of stuff and a few people
said no we're not gonna do that and so I
was certainly writing a lot about this
is a really really bad idea
now what I did pales in comparison with
what Nancy Pelosi did I mean she's
really the person who saved Social
Security my favorite Nancy Pelosi quote
they asked when are you going to come up
with your plan for Social Security and
she said never it will never do for you
but the the so that was but that was a
case really where at least yeah there
was a pretense that there was a rational
argument for what Bush was trying to do
which was good from my point of view
because it meant that you could actually
spend you know productively tear that
our argument to shreds now I think what
what really really mattered was that and
this is one of these things I'm where
people talk about bubbles and I I think
that people of upper income are in a
bubble they don't understand how
absolutely central Social Security is to
the lives of most Americans that the
majority of people depend on Social
Security for the majority of their
retirement and that a quarter of
Americans basically have nothing in
retirement exceptional Social Security
so you say I'm going to change this into
a system of risky private accounts it
turns out that people basically the
nation as a whole said hell no and but
that was it that was it wasn't something
was the first it was the first policy
debate since I started writing for the
New York Times where my side actually
won oh that's a nice feeling yeah do you
feel like do you feel sometimes that you
are just shrieking into the void with
your colors
oh yeah do you or do are you do you feel
like you're out there changing one mind
at a time you're just in there
in the trenches I think it's much more a
question of providing people with the
arguments that move stuff so it's not
that thank you
it's not that uh there are a lot of
people out there you know it's not that
there are they're conservatives who read
my column and say you know he's right
and and transform at the moment what
happens sometimes but not often but you
can provide the arguments you can help
lay the groundwork for that so that
people do stuff but you know directive
certainly don't want to exaggerate the
importance you know only you know how
many times in my life have I told a
person with real power what he should be
doing and have him actually do it and
the answer is once and and the person in
question was actually the Prime Minister
of Japan so wait what did you tell the
Japan to do cancel that tax increase you
need you need the economy to keep on
building momentum and oh great okay well
thank you okay we're saving Japan okay
which which zombie idea has caused you
the greatest red hot personal distress
and what does Paul Krugman look like
when he's in a tizzy oh just like I'm
making my toaster salmon and now it's
burned no oh no I think that the moment
when I got really closest to being
horrified it wasn't the worst thing
that's happened to policy or the world
but there was this period around 2010
2011 when the gray tree you know we'd
had the financial crisis and most of the
advanced world was still in a pretty
dire straits we had high unemployment
here we there was catastrophic
unemployment in lots of Europe and all
of a sudden everybody everybody all the
important people decided that
unemployment was not the problem budget
deficits were the problem and what we
needed was fiscal austerity and that was
where I really was tearing my hair out
because we knew that wasn't right and it
was really clear from the evidence that
it wasn't right and we knew what to do
and it was
only time to have to continue fiscal
stimulus until the economy was a lot
closer to full employment and yet all
the important people including them
sorry to say they even even President
Obama was starting to talk the austerity
talk and that was that was probably the
most frustrating year that I've gone
through now I don't you know I don't I
don't smash place beside that mm-hmm
Wednesday I'm a calm person but there
but but it's sort of a constant level of
anxiety I don't have okay vibrating
energy and stress and anxiety
yeah I relate to you yeah okay tell us
something about yourself that we would
not expect did you invest in beanie
babies and get out just before the
bubble burst Oh like what
no no I've written a little bit about
this so some people may know this but
I'm in my late 50s I discovered indie
rock and so my favorite my favorite
activity these days is to go to some
small venue standing only I mean I was
get the best seats in the house cuz
there are no seats in the house standing
with a beer in my hand listening to some
young really good band yes I say
sometimes I'm that do you recall the
last
standing-room-only concert that you want
to oh sure just a little over a month
ago cos I went to Rockwood Music Hall
and saw reina del CID who which is a
anybody knows very you know justjust on
the early stages of their career and
it's a very sort of folk group from
Minneapolis and they're great a sec I
was actually just reflecting to someone
yesterday I wonder what all of our
retirement homes are gonna look like in
the future because I just think we're
gonna need DJs I feel like the
retirement homes of the future are gonna
be much cooler than they were
yeah you have needs you need like you
need you need you need cool music yeah
I'm not sure about the standing
all night with a beer in your hand I'm
sure that I'll be able to do that 15
years from you can do that you'll be
there I'll come and find you okay okay
do you have what gives you I'm gonna
move on to audience questions in one
second but I always like to ask the
question of what brings you what makes
you feel hopeful for the next year
because I think a lot of us are not
feeling that necessarily is there
anything that you look to you don't have
to tell me your self-care routine I know
what it is now right but what does
anything bring you hope and you don't
and nothing but for me here I don't know
I mean the year
God knows no one knows what this
election is going to be and and yeah so
you know I'll be like this like
everybody else right up until the end I
mean the if you step back a little bit I
I do think in a lot of ways we are a
better society in spite of all of these
things we are a better society than we
were I mean I've been at this for a long
time and it's sometimes hard to remember
how back even during the Reagan years
how much just raw casual racism
homophobia there was and it wasn't until
sometime in the mid 1980s that that a
plurality of white people thought that
interracial marriages were okay so you
know we're we're a vastly more tolerant
open society than we used to be and
that's probably the thing that gives me
the biggest hope great okay I'm gonna
ask audience questions now yes that's
lovely all right these are already these
are very good I'm gonna read them as is
will Bloomberg alter the primaries or
election god knows
he's pouring so much money he's pouring
so much money although to his credit a
lot of it looks less like promoting Mike
Bloomberg than promoting the Democratic
yes I I will give him that and now I do
I I find myself in rooms where there are
lots of people who who think that might
Bloomberg would do you agree choice for
president
but those are the the people in those
rooms are consists almost entirely of of
men and grey suits with seven figure
rings yeah so so I I don't I don't
really take him very seriously as a
presidential candidate but who knows
yeah I think he has pledged to take all
of that money and push it in that's
right yes it's less of an ego trip I
mean it is a you go trip but it's not an
uncontrolled ego trip so he's doing a
Super Bowl ad and we made a fake Super
Bowl ad for him tomorrow that will Errol
okay
very very good I'll try to watch it I
think that he will enjoy it and maybe
maybe it'll become I don't know it's
actually great good okay Bernie not to
toot my own horn toot toot okay Bernie
or Warren plans what is the difference
okay war in terms of goals in terms of
being very progressive then similar
Warren has actually thought it through
Warren actually does does the does the
homework she's a thinker she not just
the thinking she's also actually very
good at picking the right people if you
look at the cast of people who've
actually done her plans it's amazing
Bernie it's a lot more casual as numbers
don't actually add up it's a really you
know it's Sanders it's much more of an
attitude than an actual set of plans now
okay and I'm gonna get some grief I get
a lot of grief from the Bernie people
some they're little there's a little bit
of a I don't want to start a fight here
so I start that fight
let me say that in practice I don't
think I actually don't think it makes a
whole lot of difference if any Democrat
wins and takes the Senate good with if
if they don't take the Senate then
you've been nothing but if any Democrat
wins what will actually emerge will be
something far far more modest than
Bernie's plans probably far far more
modest than Warren's plans which I think
she acknowledges that it's we're not
good Medicare for all that's not going
to happen in the next four years massive
a massive increase in government
spending in taxes it's not going to
happen in practice you're going to get
something that's basically a hopefully a
greatly enhanced Obamacare more aid to
families substantially more progressive
agenda and that's gonna happen I think
with any of the candidates because even
the centrists are actually way to the
left of where Democrats were ten years
ago so my guess is that the actual
policy agenda of a Biden administration
and the Sanders administration would be
almost indistinguishable I do think that
it behooves us all to really practice
getting behind one candidate well there
are times rules I cannot do you don't
know which party I favor
listen but I can times can't do an
endorsement well that's another issue I
know nothing I was not involved in that
no but the but no I mean the point is
you do need to realize that on on the
one hand if even if you think that the
you know if you're a centrist and you
think that the Bernie Sanders agenda is
way too aggressive don't worry about it
it's not it that's not going to be what
actually happens and even if you are
progressive and you think that Joe Biden
is much too centrist for your taste
the fact of the matter is he'll be far
more progressive obviously than the
current administration
far more progressive in fact than the
Obama administration was because the
Democratic Party has changed so it you
should nobody I think who supports with
the general thrust of where the
Democratic Party is these days should
have any qualms about supporting any of
the candidates in the general election
they're all going have you any theories
about why farmers factory workers and
other blue-collar workers continue to
support Trump despite the fact that his
economic policies hurt them the well
first of all just race I mean it's a
it's if you nothing in American politics
makes sense without without talking
about race you know the the original sin
of America colors everything and I think
that is actually according to political
science people that that is the dominant
thing the racial antagonism is what
predicts votes and it's and Trump has
sort of given people license to say
things believe things that they didn't
want to before there's a little bit of
also just a kind of the people want
someone who so I see another old line
right for to any complex problem there
is a solution that is simple clear and
wrong and Trump is Trump is is full of
that kind of thing and so and it takes a
look it takes quite a while you know the
fact that matter is the manufacturing
it's it's odd that the the very things
that Trump said he was gonna really help
are the parts of the economy that are
doing worse so the the economy as a
whole is you know pretty good employment
but manufacturing employments is
declining the so he hasn't actually
managed to bring that and of course in
the case of the farmers it's been
devastating but they among other thing I
think it's actually hard for people to
admit how big a mistake they made in
voting for him right so you know if
you're a farmer who's that Trump is
going to bring that
they have the real America she's funny
all my neighbors going bankrupt and I'm
not doing too well but you cannot quite
bring yourself to to admit that you were
snookered as badly as you were and
that's the Opera and you don't like it
you stand at the end anyway because
you're like well this was expensive yeah
I didn't I didn't like it but oh yes you
guys really tried hard yeah okay it was
very glitzy are there economists with
and I should write it down I guess we're
almost a time or I don't want to go over
but we did start a tiny bit late are
there are there economists with points
of view that contradict yours when you
respect or admire or are they just wrong
sell out your friends that's my ad at
the end not I mean there are different
levels there are there are no economists
none of the economists who think the tax
cuts pay for themselves are people I
respect but we can have real they'll I
think there are issues that are real
disagreements I mean I Ben Bernanke and
I disagree about the effectiveness of
unconventional monetary policy he thinks
it works better than I do I obviously
take his views very seriously right I
don't I think I'm right but God knows
that you know they I could very well be
wrong in saying that there were people
there are I'm if I single somebody else
out everybody at don't sing but there
but there are there are people there
Economist's who are self-identified
Republicans although some of them have
actually renounced that lately but but
who I think do really really good work
on things like urban development
transportation economics so there's
plenty of stuff but on the core
political issues the stuff that really
matters taxes climate policy no I'm
afraid that there are the people if
people I disagree with are not
they're just not in the same business
I'm in they're not even trying to get
the facts right they're just trying to
to serve a political agenda and whatever
you know some people would say that
about me but it any true the fact things
I'm actually trying to get it right
right okay great okay what listen this
is a good question what lesson did you
learn from observing and talking with
the Obama administration that the next
Democratic president should know okay
don't listen to Wall Street I was it was
the one place where I really felt that
there was a problem was that the that
Wall Street guys had too much influence
with Obama and company and not you know
not a nefarious buyout although it is a
little disturbing how many Obama
officials ended up going to work for
Citigroup or whatever afterwards but but
more that finance industry types they
tend on on average to be pretty smart to
be sophisticated kind of interesting to
talk to they have terrific tailors and
so they're and so they're very
impressive in conversation and they gave
terrible advice and and the Obama
administration was not nearly hard
enough on the bankers and so
I was five I was part of Obama's
personality he is that kind he very
moderate soft-spoken articulate that
plays with him and so we would there
were meetings where people like Joe
Stiglitz and me you know scrappy frumpy
professors were arguing for a harder
line on the banks and then there were
people from Wall Street and guess who
came across as more impressive in those
meetings right so but but Joe and I were
right and there you have a great tailor
don't sell yourself short but but the so
that's I mean I think of any future
Democratic administration it's going to
have to to watch out because it's not
gonna have a hard time Democrats not
gonna have a hard time understanding
that that coal industry executives are
not his friend Frank but it may be a
little bit harder to understand that
sophisticated socially liberal bankers
from New Yorker also not their friends
right okay that's great okay I'm gonna
ask one last question I think I'm gonna
wrap it up this is a good one what will
it take to increase worker wages again a
lot has to do with power so unions
I mean rebuilding a union movement is a
tremendously important thing America
where a quarter of the workforce was
unionized was a very different place the
if you ask why our Scandinavian
countries so much less unequal than we
are the fact that they have over 50
percent unionization matters Latin and
unions depend a lot on the political
environment if you make it easy for them
to organize and make it illegal to to to
engage in its suppression of union
organizing efforts that makes a huge
difference
minimum wage can matter a lot as well
and this is one of those cases where we
have overwhelming evidence that up to a
point I mean I even I wouldn't call for
a $30 an hour minimum wage but it's
overwhelming that they're raising the
minimum wage to at least 13 and probably
15 is is no problem at all no job losses
and it not just it's not just the
minimum wage workers that sort of
cascade
of the scale just generally who want
political power to be on the side of
workers in their bargaining with
employers and that could make a huge
difference
great I think this was great I want to
thank all of you thank you so much for
talking to all of us thank you just
wonderful I want to wish you luck on
your 1,000 97th book tour that you've
been on books are available in the lobby
it was a pleasure talking to you please
come on my show again and talk for like
an hour
oh I'll take it thank you
[Applause]